Distinct Attribute (#32)
meilisearch/specifications: text/0032-distinct-attribute.md

- Title: Distinct Attribute
- Start Date: 2021-04-16
- Specification PR: [#32](https://github.com/meilisearch/specifications/pull/32)

> - MeiliSearch Tracking-Issues: TBD

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- MeiliSearch Tracking-Issues: [milli#168](https://github.com/meilisearch/milli/issues/168)
```

# Distinct Attribute

## 1. Feature Description and Interaction

### I. Summary

The distinct attribute is usefull to discard other occurences of document having the same value as the field setted as a distinct attribute.

The value of a field whose attribute is set as a distinct attribute will always be unique in the returned documents.

### II. Motivation

The new search engine called Milli no longer processes the distinct attribute as the current MeilliSearch. This specification makes it possible to state that Milli will be as backwards compatible as possible with the v0.20 in the usage of API interfaces but also in the expected search results.

### III. Additional Materials

#### Algolia

> Algolia distinct feature is based on one attribute, as defined in `attributeForDistinct`. It is possible to limit the number of returned records that contains the same attribute value. It is done at indexing time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Algolia distinct feature is based on one attribute, as defined in `attributeForDistinct`. Adding an attribute to this setting will make that all search results have a different value in the given attributes field.

This is done at processing time.
```

What is processing time? On search? On indexing ? Sorry ><

Author: Indexing. I will precise that! Thank you

Author: I've just see that you added processing time when I used indexing time before!

|-------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| group_by    | It is possible to aggregate records into groups by setting multiple fields separated by a comma. E.g. group_by=country,company_name                                                                                                           |
| group_limit | Control the maximum number of top records returned for groups. By default, TypeSense `group_limit` parameter is set to 3.                                                                                                                     |

Using group_by add a nested structure in the search result. Buckets are returned in `grouped_hits` field.

#### ElasticSearch

Elasticsearch does not provide this functionality directly. Nor a keyword or an operator exists to get de-duplicated or grouped results.

> It is difficult to find the information in the official documentation. A lot of people are asking about the distinct feature on StackOverflow or ElasticSearch forums.

Reviewer 2: Their documentation seems to be voluntarily hard

Author: This can be explained by the fact that they do not target a particular application with Elasticsearch. The documentation is much more precise for their Enterprise products which are scoped on specific use cases.

    "query": "t-shirt"
}
```

Without setting `product_id` as a distinct attribute, a search with `t-shirt` as a query will return the two documents.

It can be useful to display one product per color variation as a search result for example. But as your number of products variations grows over time, you might want to display only one result as a top search result, mostly for UI concerns.

It's in this case that the distinct attribute finds all its interest.

Setting `product_id` as a distinct attribute will discard all others documents having the same value for `product_id` from the search result.

#### Distinct Attribute in v0.20

> MeiliSearch accepts only one value which is the document attribute that needs to be de-duplicated from the other document sharing the same attribute value.

It is possible to configure the distinct attribute using two endpoints. [Update All Settings](https://docs.meilisearch.com/reference/api/settings.html#update-settings) and the [distinct attribute](https://docs.meilisearch.com/reference/api/distinct_attribute.html#update-distinct-attribute) endpoint.

Given this setting :
```json
{
    "distinctAttribute": "product_id"
}
```

> MeiliSearch will return de-duplicated hits by `product_id`.

Reviewer 2: Not sure I understand `de-duplicated`

Author: If we have multiple documents containing the same value for `product_id`. Only one document will be returned if `product_id` is set as a distinct attribute.

If the user wants to filter on that attribute, he will have to add it in `attributesForFaceting` as well.

Using this new data structure allows interesting future possibilities.

## 3. Future possibilities

> These ideas will be materialized as feature-proposals in the product team backlog. Keep in mind that this specification is related to v0.21.

### Grouping
#### Distinct count to enable grouping feature

Since MeiliSearch can only de-duplicate documents matching the distinct attribute, it would be interesting to be able to set the number of topmost relevant documents before discarding the others.

`groupLimit` could be applied at search time to fit users needs.

#### Distinct on multiple fields

> It probably require to add a nested structure to return hits for each groups with clarity.

##### Indexing time

Given this distinct setting:

```json
{
    "distinctAttributes": ["colors", "size"]
}
```

##### Search time

> We could add a `groupBy` like parameter to let the user choose a specific grouping behavior:

Reviewer 2: groupby would mean that we would have sub-objects on hits ?

```js
hits = {
   red: [ { id: 1, color: "red", label: "nike"}, { id: 2, color: "red", label: "reebok"} ],
   yellow: [ { id: 1, color: "yellow", label: "nike"}, { id: 1, color: "yellow", label: "reebok"} ]
}
```

Author: Exactly! See TypeSense group_by feature! https://typesense.org/docs/0.19.0/api/documents.html#group-by

Reviewer 2: Okey! Its a choice ... :')
